---
layout: post
title: "In Defense of the Humanities"
category: "Education"
comments: true
date: 2018-03-20
excerpt: "In several countries, secondary schools and colleges are coming under fire for not adequately preparing students for the realities of the labor market. However, reducing the emphasis on liberal arts (and even theoretical mathematics and science) and aligning curricula with the perceived demands of the labor market would be short-sighted and detrimental to both students and employers."
---

A recent [article in the Atlantic](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2018/01/whats-college-good-for/546590/) inspired me to contribute to the ongoing discussion about the degree to which the Liberal Arts - literature, history, philosophy, mathematics and the social sciences - ought to be taught in the classrooms of universities and secondary schools. A number of critics such as Professor Bryan Caplan of George Mason University, the author of the aforementioned article, argue that a Liberal Arts education does not adequately prepare students for the labor market and their future jobs. In the article, he goes on to make the different, but related argument that encouraging an increasing number of students to study at four-year colleges is pushing credential inflation and makes students go to classes in which, lacking motivation, they do not learn much - in brief, that having to attend college just to be able to get a job is bad for a number of reasons. With this, I agree. It is the following paragraph of the article that made me stumble:

> From kindergarten on, students spend thousands of hours studying subjects irrelevant to the modern labor market. Why do English classes focus on literature and poetry instead of business and technical writing? Why do advanced-math classes bother with proofs almost no student can follow? When will the typical student use history? Trigonometry? Art? Music? Physics? Latin? The class clown who snarks “What does this have to do with real life?” is onto something.

As the author correctly identifies, much of what students learn over the course of a Liberal Arts curriculum is not directly convertible into skills needed at the workplace. But this is not necessarily bad: Demanding it would reduce education to the production of automata perfectly adapted for working in an office, completely unprepared for all other aspects of life. Indeed, in the long term, employers and the economy as a whole benefit more from Liberal Arts graduates than they might think.

## Culture as the aim of education

Much of Europe and parts of the U.S. essentially follow an education scheme devised by [Wilhelm von Humboldt](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilhelm_von_Humboldt) in the beginning of the 19th century. Not only did he invent the three-tiered education system comprised of elementary school, secondary school and university, but he also emphasized the teaching of mathematics, history, philosophy, science and foreign languages to all students, irrespective of their future careers:

> There are undeniably certain kinds of knowledge that must be of a general nature and, more importantly, a certain cultivation of the mind and character that nobody can afford to be without. People obviously cannot be good craftworkers, merchants, soldiers or businessmen unless, regardless of their occupation, they are good, upstanding and – according to their condition – well-informed human beings and citizens.

According to Humboldt, school should not only be generalist in nature and cover subjects from the social, literary and natural sciences, but it should *explicitly not* aim to (at least exclusively) prepare students for their future professions. Instead, it should aim to "cultivate mind and character". For Humboldt, culture - literature, philosophy, oration and all other subjects which do not immediately prepare students for the labor market - should not only be taught; education very much *is* culture. This emphasizes an ancient and powerful idea dating back to at least Greek antiquity. The word "education" comes from the Latin verb "educere" which literally means "to draw out" - a presumably desired allegory to the growing of plants and produce out of the soil. "Culture" is also a part of "agriculture" and "horticulture"; again, culture is associated with growth. For the ancient Greeks, education aimed at culture, or personal growth. [Primary education in ancient Greece](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Education_in_ancient_Greece#New_Education) consisted of music, dance, lyrics and poetry; higher education consisted of "mathematics, astronomy, harmonics and dialectic[s]" as well as philosophy, none of which were of immediate use in a workplace. Instead, education had the aim of developing man in his entirety, forming his character and providing a base for good judgment. In ancient Greece and Rome, in medieval Europe and even throughout the Renaissance, this mode of education remained a privilege of the elites. Children form working-class or merchant families either learned a trade or did not go to school altogether. Wilhelm von Humboldt's vision was to use education to bring culture to the masses; to provide the majority of students with a space for developing their characters.

## Isn't this a bit naive? 

At first sight, this "humanistic" view seems naive. But one must remember that a Humboldtian liberal arts education is not about the development of a "good" character[^1], but rather about the development of critical, lateral thinking, creativity and the ability of understanding the world both emotionally and scientifically. No, theoretical mathematics is not directly useful for most jobs. It does, however, teach a systematic way of approaching and making sense of real-world problems. No, students probably never need to know the proof for why [dividing by zero is a bad idea](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BRRolKTlF6Q). But understanding proofs helps students to analytically tackle real-world problems and gives them an understanding of logic and logical thinking which is [useful beyond mathematics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conjunction_fallacy). The same principle applies for the teaching of philosophy. Very few students will go on to become professional philosophers and morals can (or [cannot](http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674072251)) be debated, but above all philosophy teaches critical thinking, which is useful and indeed crucial in many jobs. Similarly, practicing linguistic and artistic expression fosters creativity and improves the "soft skills" sought after in the modern labor market. Learning "hard skills" is relatively straightforward and can be done in professional training and, most often, simply by practising. Instead, formal education should focus on endowing students with the tools required to solve problems and make sense of the world on their own - which is precisely done by a Humboldtian, liberal arts education, and which can be highly economically effective, particularly in service-oriented, information-driven modern economies.

## The danger of abolishing the Liberal Arts

One might argue that even in a modern economy, factory workers, artisans or office clerks do not need critical thinking, a fundamental understanding of logic or, in many cases, much creativity. Indeed, for their employers, it would probably be more efficient to have schools teach them just what they need to do the same things every day, over and over, at a high pace and constant quality. Taking this to the extremes, however, illustrates the dangers of abolishing the Liberal Arts: Humans would be turned into machines, made with the sole aim to serve an economic system and their employers. A part of the population would be denied culture - the right to grow as *humans*, the right to experience art, of making sense of their emotional responses to the world and of constantly questioning their picture of the world; in the extreme, it would amount to dehumanization and deprive society of critically thinking citizens and innovators. Education should not serve abstract entities such as the economy. It should serve people, just by virtue of them being people and not because they ought to be economically productive. The point is not that everybody should learn and study nothing but the Liberal Arts, and Mr. Caplan does have a point in criticizing credentialism and [degree inflation](https://www.forbes.com/sites/prestoncooper2/2018/01/08/employers-demanding-college-degrees-weaken-the-economy/#9af352e6b11a). But employers and the economy as a whole can benefit from education not being a slave of the economy and from allowing people to study "unproductive" things such as philosophy, theoretical maths or literature. There should always be demand for creative, critical thinkers.  

***

[^1]: This would even be dangerous. What makes a human's character "good"? What makes for a "good" moral and philosophical education? Some might argue a "good" person espouses liberal values; others argue that in order for a person to be "good", his or her way of thinking must be along party lines or put a "national interest" first. The development of "good" characters should thus *not* be the aim of education.